Richard Daft - Management.

Ch1.  
 
Management is the art of getting things done through people.
As a manager, your job is to create the
environment and conditions that engage other people in goal accomplishment.

Management is the attainment of organizational goals in an effective and effi -
cient manner through planning, organizing, leading, and controlling organizational
resources.

This definition holds two important ideas: (1) the four functions of planning, organizing,
leading, and controlling, and (2) the attainment of organizational goals in an
effective and effi cient manner.

Planning.
Planning means identifying goals for future organizational performance and deciding
on the tasks and use of resources needed to attain them. In other words, managerial
planning defines where the organization wants to be in the future and how to get there.

Organizing
Organizing typically follows planning and reflects how the organization tries to
accomplish the plan. Organizing involves assigning tasks, grouping tasks into departments,
delegating authority, and allocating resources across the organization.

Leading
Leading is the use of influence to motivate employees
to achieve organizational goals.
Leading involves motivating entire departments and
divisions as well as those individuals working immediately
with the manager.


Controlling
Controlling means
monitoring employees' activities, determining whether the organization is on target
toward its goals, and making corrections as necessary.

p38

p189

Ch6.

Goals and plans enhance employees'
motivation and commitment by reducing uncertainty and clarifying what they
should accomplish. Lack of a clear goal can hamper motivation because people
don’t understand what they’re working toward


p195


Goals should be specific and measurable.
Vague goals have a little motivating power for employees.
Goals should be challenging but realistic.
When goals are unrealistic, they set employees up for failure and lead to a decrease in employee morale.
Goals should be linked with rewards. Reward people when they meet goals.
 
 
 
SMART
S for  Specific (What exactly do we need; definite and precise goals)
M for Measurable (How we are going to measure it (expressed in quantitative terms))
A for Attainable (The goal must be realistic)
R for Relevant (What results can realistically be achieved, given available resources)
T for Time-bound (We expect growth for the next year, month or any other time period)
 
 
Methods by Objectives (MBO)
MBO is the system where managers and employees together define goals.
 
1. Set goals (Corporate, Departmental, Individual). MBO implies that every employee should take part in it, but maybe it should be only key workers.
2. Develop action plans.
3. Review progress and make corrections periodically if something goes wrong or circumstances have changed.
4. Appraise overall performance. It shapes goals for the next period and allows rewards.
 
 
Single-Use Plans
Plans that are developed to achieve a set of goals that are unlikely to be repeated in the future.
There are two kind of SUP:
Programs - great plans for several years, large in scope. May be associated with several projects.
Project - smaller and shorter than program. Little undertaking.
 
Standing Plans
Plans that provide guidance for tasks and situation that occur repeatedly within organization.
Standing plans generally pertain to such matters as employee illness, absences, smoking, discipline, hiring and dismissal. And sometimes the use of emails.
Policies (broad in scope), rules (narrow in scope, defines how specific action should be performed) and procedures (defines series of steps to attain certain goal).

p.203



Ch7.

Strategic management refers to the set of decisions and actions used to formulate
and execute strategies that will provide a competitively superior fit between the
organization and its environment so as to achieve organizational goals.

Strategy is a plan of allocating resources for achieving organizational goals.
Strategy is changing over time to fit environmental conditions.
Competitive advantage is a thing that distincts organization from other companies.

Core competence is an activity that company does particularly well in comparison to competitors.







