Richard Daft - Management.

---------------- 
INTRODUCTION TO MANAGEMENT
Ch1. Innovative Management
----------------  

Management is the art of getting things done through people.
As a manager, your job is to create the
environment and conditions that engage other people in goal accomplishment.

Management is the attainment of organizational goals in an effective and effi -
cient manner through planning, organizing, leading, and controlling organizational
resources.

This definition holds two important ideas: (1) the four functions of planning, organizing,
leading, and controlling, and (2) the attainment of organizational goals in an
effective and effi cient manner.

Planning.
Planning means identifying goals for future organizational performance and deciding
on the tasks and use of resources needed to attain them. In other words, managerial
planning defines where the organization wants to be in the future and how to get there.

Organizing
Organizing typically follows planning and reflects how the organization tries to
accomplish the plan. Organizing involves assigning tasks, grouping tasks into departments,
delegating authority, and allocating resources across the organization.

Leading
Leading is the use of influence to motivate employees
to achieve organizational goals.
Leading involves motivating entire departments and
divisions as well as those individuals working immediately
with the manager.


Controlling
Controlling means
monitoring employees' activities, determining whether the organization is on target
toward its goals, and making corrections as necessary.

p189

---------------- 
PLANNING
Ch6. Managerial Planning and Goal Setting
---------------- 

Goals and plans enhance employees'
motivation and commitment by reducing uncertainty and clarifying what they
should accomplish. Lack of a clear goal can hamper motivation because people
don’t understand what they’re working toward


p195


Goals should be specific and measurable.
Vague goals have a little motivating power for employees.
Goals should be challenging but realistic.
When goals are unrealistic, they set employees up for failure and lead to a decrease in employee morale.
Goals should be linked with rewards. Reward people when they meet goals.
 
 
 
SMART
S for  Specific (What exactly do we need; definite and precise goals)
M for Measurable (How we are going to measure it (expressed in quantitative terms))
A for Attainable (The goal must be realistic)
R for Relevant (What results can realistically be achieved, given available resources)
T for Time-bound (We expect growth for the next year, month or any other time period)
 
 
Methods by Objectives (MBO)
MBO is the system where managers and employees together define goals.
 
1. Set goals (Corporate, Departmental, Individual). MBO implies that every employee should take part in it, but maybe it should be only key workers.
2. Develop action plans.
3. Review progress and make corrections periodically if something goes wrong or circumstances have changed.
4. Appraise overall performance. It shapes goals for the next period and allows rewards.
 
 
Single-Use Plans
Plans that are developed to achieve a set of goals that are unlikely to be repeated in the future.
There are two kind of SUP:
Programs - great plans for several years, large in scope. May be associated with several projects.
Project - smaller and shorter than program. Little undertaking.
 
Standing Plans
Plans that provide guidance for tasks and situation that occur repeatedly within organization.
Standing plans generally pertain to such matters as employee illness, absences, smoking, discipline, hiring and dismissal. And sometimes the use of emails.
Policies (broad in scope), rules (narrow in scope, defines how specific action should be performed) and procedures (defines series of steps to attain certain goal).

p.203

Contingency plans define company responses to be taken in the case of emergencies and unexpected conditions.
After defining the most probable negative events the scenarios are built for them. Typically there are several scenarios for each factor, ranging from the most optimistic to 
the most pessimistic view. Building scenarios allows to act fast when something happens due to it was predicted and a plan was created.

How to handle crisis when it occurs.
1. Designate a crisis management team and spokeperson
2. Prepare a plan that management team should perform.
3. Set up an effective communication system

There are two approaches to planning.
1. Centralized planning. (Waterfall).
Has that disadvantage that may be inaproppriate in fast-paced environment.
2. Decentralized planning involves everyone in organization in the planning process. Employees become more commited following their own plans.
Planning experts work directly with line managers and front-line employees.


Stretch goals
2. Performance dashboards. So everyone could see the progress.

Sometimes you need to shame your employees to cheer them up. (not too often. Once in three months)
p.215

----------------
PLANNING 
Ch7. Strategy Formulation and Implementation
---------------- 

Strategic management refers to the set of decisions and actions used to formulate
and execute strategies that will provide a competitively superior fit between the
organization and its environment so as to achieve organizational goals.

Strategy is a plan of allocating resources for achieving organizational goals.
Strategy is changing over time to fit environmental conditions.
Competitive advantage is a thing that distincts organization from other companies.

Core competence is an activity that company does particularly well in comparison to competitors.


Strategic management is the set of decisions and actions used to formulate and execute strategies that will provide advantages comparing to competitors.
To formulate these decisions one must understand what changes and trends are occurring?
Who are our customers? Who are our competitors?


Strategy is a plan of action that describes resource allocation to gain competitive advantage and attaining the organization's goals.
Competitive advantage refers to what sets the organization apart from others and provides it
with a distinctive edge for meeting customer or client needs in the marketplace.
Usually it's an accessibility to different resources (channels of distribution, technologies, logistics) allowing company to make it's product cheaper, better. 

Core competency is something that company does especially well in comparison to it's competitors.
Core competency must not be easy to imitate.
A core competence may be in the area of superior research and development, expert technological know-how, process effi ciency, or exceptional customer service.

Core competence may be in providing a superior service for large group meetings (for hotels), in focusing on high quality in a limited product line.


Sometimes results of joint efforts surpass sum of results of separate parts.


Vertical integration is the company expansion to businesses that produce supplies to their core business or go to distribution directly.
1) Wine company buyes bottle factory to reduce costs by making cheaper bottles.
2) Apple opened it's own stores to sell iPhones, iPads and iSoOn  
 
 
Porter five forces
1) Threat of new entrants
The question is how difficult to enter new market. Because there may be some barriers like patents, great amount of money, government policy, access to distribution and so on.
2) Threat of substitutes
There are threats of two kinds: substitute in the same field (Pepsi and Coca-Cola) and substitute from another field (sugar and sugar substitute, train and plane)
3) Bargaining power of customers
Bargaining power of customers is great when customers have alternatives.
4) Bargaining power of suppliers
Ex. 1 supplyer many customers.
 
For company to stay on the competetive edge Porter proposes to use one of three strategies:
1. Differentiation. Something that allows to customer to distinguish your product. 
It may be achieved by advertising, distinctive product features, exceptional service.
2. Cost leadership. This strategy uses tight cost controls to make product more cheap.
But sometimes people prefer the product not watching the price. They may buy it for it's reputation. 
The product gives feeling of belonging to elite. Apple products are the good example.
3. Focus. This strategy is based on focusing on specific region or buyer group.
Company will use differentiation or cost leadership but only for narrow target market.
 
 
Globalization. Helps save millions on marketing by using single all-over-the-world strategy.
Ex. MacDonalds and Coca-Cola.

Multidomestic strategy. Design, marketing and advertising change from country to country to fit indigenous culture.
Ex. The beauty standarts vary. Asians prize white smooth skin, while europeans like tanned skin.
Africans prefer to see black people in ads. Frenchmen don't drink orange juice on breakfast. And so on.


After the new strategy has been set it should be implemented. It's the most difficult part.
1. Leadership
You need to convince people, motivate them, use your country cultural values to persuade managers to follow the strategy.
There might be public speeches, building coalitions of people who support new ideas, personal persuasion of middle management.

Clear, measurable goals and rewards that are tied to implementation efforts are also important
for gaining commitment.


2. Structural Design.
We need to set manager's responsibilities. The degree of their authority. The consolidation of facilities and departments.	
Many new strategies require making changes in organizational structure: adding/changing positions, reorganizing the teams, 
shifting manager's responsibilities and accountabilities (отчетность).
 
 
3. Information and control systems.
These systems help management to see what is going on. Collecting data helps managers predict future trends.

4. Human resources.
When designing structure of orgainization you may need new people who have skills to fit new strategy.
Also cross-training employees may help, that enables them to perform a variety of functions.
 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Tips for Effective Strategy Execution
 
1. Build commitment to the strategy
Managers make a great effort to make front-line managers to understand the new direction. 
Clear, measurable goals and rewards that are tied to implementation efforts are also important
for gaining commitment. 
 
2. Devise a clear execution plan.

Without such a plan, managers and staff are likely to lose sight of the new strategy 
when they return to the everyday demands of their jobs. For successful execution, translate
the strategy into a simple, streamlined plan that breaks the implementation process into a
series of short-term actions, with a timetable for each step.

Everybody should be aware of how success will be measured and tracked, what resources will be required
and how they will be allocated.

4. Know your employees' knowledge and skills.
People from your organization may already have all required skills to fit new strategy.
So there is no need to search for people from somewhere else.
Also some training may be useful to add some skills.

5. Communication
Managers should know how things are going, identify problems, and keep people informed about the
organization’s progress. Barriers should be broken for effective communication.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 

SWOT-analysis is about to understand companies Strengths (S), Weaknesses (W), Opportunities (O), Threats (T).
S and W refers to internal environment, thus company may impact them.
O and T refers to external environment, thus company has no impact to them.

Strengths: characteristics of the business or project that give it an advantage over others.
Weaknesses: characteristics that place the business or project at a disadvantage relative to others
Opportunities: elements that the project could exploit to its advantage
Threats: elements in the environment that could cause trouble for the business or project

---------------- 
PLANNING
Ch8. Managerial Decision Making
---------------- 

Decision making is the process of identifying problems and opportunities and then resolving them.
Programmed decisions are decisions for situations that occur often enough and it is possible to develop rules
that may be applied in the future.


Nonprogrammed decisions are made in response to situations that are unique,
are poorly defined and largely unstructured, and have important consequences for the organization. 
Many nonprogrammed decisions involve strategic planning because uncertainty is
great and decisions are complex.


p.248


There are three strategies of decision making:
1. Classical model is based on rational economic assumptions and manager beliefs about what ideal decision should be.
There are 4 assumptions underlying this model:
a. Problems are precisely formulated and defined. The goals are known and agreed on.
b. All alternatives and the potential results of each are calculated.
c. There is a criteria for decisions. For example, no losses allowed.
d. The decision maker is rational and uses logic.

Decision makers should be more rational and not rely entirely on personal preference in making decisions.
The guidelines can be created. Thus classical model is about programmed decisions.

2. Administrative model
In case of uncertainty and ambiguity manager's rationality has bounds. 
Organization and circumstances may be extremely complex. So managers
have the time and ability to process only a limited amount of information with which to make decisions.

In such case manager finds the first satisficing decision and don't waste time on further searches.
Even if the better decision exists it may not fit because of time and expense of obtaining complete information.
Assumptions of administrative model:
a. Decision goals are vague and conflicting. Managers can't come up with adjusted decision.
Problems and opportunities are unknown.
b. Rational procedures are not always used because they can't capture the complexity of challenge.
c. Manager's resources are limited because of human, information, resource constraints.
d. Managers settle for a satisficing rather than a maximizing solution, partly
because they have limited information and partly because they have only vague
criteria for what constitutes a maximizing solution.


So here comes intuition. It represents a quick apprehension of a decision situation based on past experience but
without conscious thought.
Managers need to take a balanced approach by considering both rationality and intuition as important components of effective
decision making.


p.252

3. Political model
When making big decisions it's hard for managers to come up with common decision.
Political model is about making coalitions.
Political model assumptions: 
a. Organizations are made up of groups with diverse interests, goals, and values. Managers disagree about problem priorities and may not understand or share the goals and interests of other managers.
b. Information is ambiguous and incomplete. The attempt to be rational is limited by the complexity of many problems as well as personal and organizational constraints.
c. Managers do not have the time, resources, or mental capacity to identify all dimensions
of the problem and process all relevant information. Managers talk to each
other and exchange viewpoints to gather information and reduce ambiguity.
d. Managers engage in the push and pull of debate to decide goals and discuss alternatives.
Decisions are the result of bargaining and discussion among coalition
members.


Decision making process:
1. Recognition of Decision Requirement
Decision should be made when organizational goals have not been achieved. The results are below expectations.

2. Diagnosis and Analysis of Causes
When problem is recognized it is time to know when and where it has occurred?
How it occurred? What is the urgency of the problem?

3. Development of Alternatives
In highly uncertain environment managers may come up only with one or two solutions that satisfice.
But some studies find that limiting the search for alternatives is a primary cause of decision failure in organizations.


4. Selection of Desired Alternative
Select one of developed alternatives.

5. Implementation of Chosen Alternative
Similar to strategy execution in chapter 7.
Managers should believe in what they are doing. That increases commitment of their employees.


6. Evaluation and Feedback
Gathering the information that tells how well decision is implemented.



Decision making styles.
1. Directive style. 
The directive style is used by people who prefer simple, clear-cut solutions to problems.
Managers who use this style often make decisions quickly because they do
not like to deal with a lot of information and may consider only one or two alternatives.
People who prefer the directive style generally are efficient and rational
and prefer to rely on existing rules or procedures for making decisions.

2. Analytical style.
Managers with an analytical style like to consider complex solutions based on as
much data as they can gather. These individuals carefully consider alternatives
and often base their decisions on objective, rational data from management control
systems and other sources. They search for the best possible decision based on
the information available.

3. Conceptual style.
People who tend toward a conceptual style also like to consider a broad amount of
information. However, they are more socially oriented than those with an analytical
style and like to talk to others about the problem and possible alternatives for
solving it. Managers using a conceptual style consider many broad alternatives,
rely on information from both people and systems, and like to solve problems
creatively.

4. Behavioral style.
The behavioral style is often the style adopted by managers having a deep concern
for others as individuals. Managers using this style like to talk to people one-onone
and understand their feelings about the problem and the effect of a given decision on them.


Reasons of bad decisions:
1. Being influenced by initial impressions.
2. Justifying past decisions.
It is hard to close failed project if millions were poured in it.
3. Seeing what you want to see.
It is good to have a devil's advocate that will show other options or make you sure you're doing right.
4. Perpetuating the status quo. Managers may base decisions on what has worked
in the past and fail to explore new options, dig for additional information, or
investigate new technologies.
5. Framing of the problem. 
E.g. gain 100k with 100% chance and gain 600k with 33% chance.
Or lose 500k with 100% chance and lose 400k with 67% chance.
The choice depends on how problem is set.
6. Overconfidence
When uncertainty is high, managers
may unrealistically expect that they can successfully predict outcomes and hence
select the wrong alternative.


Evidence-based management.
1. Demand evidence.
Fake customers in the shop. Fake calls to support.
2. Five Whys
The first why generally produces a superficial explanation. Each subsequent why probes deeper.
3. Do a Post-Mortem.
Continuos learning in the after-action review.


Group decisions.
1. Brainstorming.
People come up with all ideas they got. No critics. Just ideas.
In fact, one study found that when four people are asked to “brainstorm” individually, they typically come up
with twice as many ideas as a group of four brainstorming together.

2. Rigorous Debates
Person vs person debate.
Group vs group debate.

CEO of MicroAge often plays the devil’s advocate, changing his position in the middle of a debate to ensure
that other executives don’t just go along with his opinions

3. Avoid groupthink
Groupthink refers to the tendency of people in groups to suppress contrary opinions. When people slip into groupthink, 
the desire for harmony outweighs concerns over decision quality

4. Know when to retreat.
Don't hide negative information. If it's better to retreat - retreat.

Essentials:

Decision making should involve six basic steps: problem recognition, diagnosis
of causes, development of alternatives, choice of an alternative, implementation
of the alternative, and feedback and evaluation.


Biases to watch out for include being
influenced by initial impressions, trying to correct or justify past flawed decisions,
seeing only what you want to see, perpetuating the status quo, being influenced
by problem framing, and being overconfident.


p262
----------------
ORGANIZING
Ch9. Designing Adaptive Organizations
----------------

Organizing is the deployment of organizational resources to achieve strategic goals.
Organization structure is defined as: 
1. the set of formal tasks assigned to individuals and departments;
2. formal reporting relationships, including lines of authority, decision responsibility, 
number of hierarchical levels, and span of managers' control; and 
3. the design of systems to ensure effective coordination of
employees across departments


Ensuring coordination across departments is just as critical as defining the departments to begin with.

Organization chart, which is the visual representation of an organization's structure.
Every employee has an appointed task, line of authority, and decision responsibility.

Work specialization is the degree to which organizational tasks are subdivided into separate jobs.
Every employee has little, well defined job.
With too much specialization employees have to perform only a single, boring job.

Chain of command.

The chain of command is an unbroken line of authority that links all persons in an
organization and shows who reports to whom. Army is a great example.
Field Marshal -> General -> Colonel -> Lieutenant -> Soldier


Authority is the formal and legitimate right
of a manager to make decisions, issue orders, and allocate resources to achieve organizationally
desired outcomes. Authority is distinguished by three characteristics:
1. Authority is vested in organizational positions, not people. Managers have
authority because of the positions they hold, and other people in the same positions
would have the same authority.
2. Barnard's acceptance theory of authority argues that a manager has authority only if 
subordinates choose to accept his commands. If subordinates refuse to obey because 
the order is outside their zone of acceptance, a manager’s authority disappears.
3. Authority flows down the vertical hierarchy. Positions at the top of the hierarchy
are vested with more formal authority than are positions at the bottom.


Responsibility is the flip side of the authority coin. Responsibility is the duty to
perform the task or activity an employee has been assigned.

When managers have responsibility for task outcomes but little authority, 
the job is possible but difficult. They rely on persuasion and luck. 
When managers have authority exceeding responsibility, they may become 
tyrants, using authority toward frivolous outcomes. 

Accountability means that person with some authority and responsibility has to report task 
outcomes to those who are above him in the command chain.
For organizations to function well, everyone needs to know what they are accountable for 
and accept the responsibility and authority for performing it.

Delegation is the process managers use to
transfer authority and responsibility to positions below them in the hierarchy.

When delegating the task use following recommendations:
1. Delegate the whole task.
Dividing task into smaller pieces and assigning them to different people is bad
because of communication problems, not equal level of motivation, possible delays.
2. Select the right person. Not all employees have the same capabilities and degree of motivation.
3. Ensure that authority equals responsibility.
Merely assigning a task is not effective delegation.
Managers often load subordinates with increased responsibility but do not extend their
decision-making range.
4. Give thorough instruction. 
Successful delegation includes information on what, when, why, where, who, and how. 
The subordinate must clearly understand the task and the expected results.
It is good to write down all requirements and consents. Task should be self-contained.
5. Maintain feedback. 
Feedback means keeping open lines of communication with the subordinate
to answer questions and provide advice, but without exerting too much control.
Even a thorough instruction may contain some ambiguity. It should be cleared.



Line departments perform tasks that reflect the organization’s primary goal and mission.


Staff departments include all those that provide specialized skills in support of
line departments. They typically include marketing, labor relations, research, accounting, 
and human resources.


Line authority means that people in management positions have formal authority
to direct and control immediate subordinates. Staff authority is narrower and
includes the right to advise, recommend, and counsel in the staff specialists' area
of expertise.


The span of management is the number of employees reporting to a supervisor.

Traditional views of organization design recommended a span of management of about 
seven subordinates per manager.


A tall structure has an overall narrow span and more hierarchical levels. 
A flat structure has a wide span, is horizontally dispersed, 
and has fewer hierarchical levels.
The trend in recent years has been toward wider spans of control as a way to facilitate delegation.

Having too many hierarchical levels and narrow spans of control is a common
structural problem for organizations.

Centralization means that decision authority is located near the top of the
organization. With decentralization, decision authority is pushed downward to lower
organization levels.

Greater change and uncertainty in the environment are usually associated with
decentralization. Local managers can handle troubles more effectively and faster than
if the problem is explained to and solved by top-manager.

In times of crisis or risk of company failure, authority may be centralized at the
top. Strategy decisions should be made at the top.

Departmentalization is the basis on which individuals are grouped into departments
and departments into the total organization.

There are five approaches:
functional, divisional and matrix are traditional approaches that rely on the chain of 
command to define departmental groupings and reporting relationships along the hierarchy.

The use of teams and virtual network are innovative approaches.

Functional structure is the grouping of positions into departments based
on similar skills, expertise, work activities, and resource use.
E.g. financial department, accounting department, manufacturing department and so on.

Divisional structure is also called product structure.
Divisional structure occurs when departments are grouped together based on similar organizational
outputs.
In each department there are accounting group, marketing group, hr group and so on.



Think of division as an autonomous business that perform different tasks, use different technologies or serve different customers.
This approach is mainly used in large corporations. Each department is focused on a single product line or customer segment.

The primary difference between divisional and functional structures is that the
chain of command from each function converges lower in the hierarchy.
In a divisional structure, differences of opinion among research and development, marketing,
manufacturing, and finance would be resolved at the divisional level rather than by
the president. Thus, the divisional structure encourages decentralization. Decision
making is pushed down at least one level in the hierarchy, freeing the president and
other top managers for strategic planning.


An alternative for assigning divisional
responsibility is to group company activities by geographic region or customer group.
Many companies are organized into regional divisions in North America, Europe, Latin America, 
the Far East (Asia), and the South Pacific (Australia and Oceania).


Matrix approach.
The matrix approach combines aspects of both functional and divisional
structures simultaneously in the same part of the organization.
The main purpose of matrix approach is to improve horizontal coordination and information
sharing. Matrix has dual lines of authority. 
Two-boss employees report to two supervisors simultaneously: to product manager and functional boss,
and resolve conflict-demands from the matrix bosses.

The top leader oversees both the product and functional chains of command. 
His responsibility is to maintain a power balance between the two sides of the matrix. 
If disputes arise between them, the problem will be kicked upstairs to the top leader.

Team Approach

One approach to using teams in organizations is through cross-functional teams, 
which consist of employees from various functional departments 
who are responsible to meet as a team and resolve mutual problems. 
Team members typically still report to their functional departments, 
but they also report to the team, one member of whom may be the leader.
Bright example of cross-functional teams may be seen in hospitals.
Some patients are treated by nurse, doctor and dietitian to solve patient's problems.


The second approach is to use permanent teams, groups of employees who
are organized in a way similar to a formal department. Each team brings together
employees from all functional areas focused on a specific task or project.
Authority is pushed down to lower levels, and front-line employees are often given the freedom
to make decisions and take action on their own.
This approach is very similar to divisional structure. But projects come and go.

With a team-based structure, the entire organization is made
up of horizontal teams that coordinate their work and work directly with customers
to accomplish the organization’s goals.


The Virtual Network Approach

The virtual network structure means that the firm subcontracts most of its major functions
to separate companies and coordinates their activities from a small headquarters organization.
But usually profit centers and customer management departments like support are kept within organization.
This approach is good unless the country meet sanctions.
Many details for russian jets were manufactured in Ukraine. When relations between these countries went wrong - 
Ukaine stopped selling details. It took Russian jet-makers several months to create a substitute.
That is reason to concentrate all crucial cycles of production in one country.
The other option is to make vertically-integrated companies.


Advantages and disadvantages of different approaches

Functional Approach.
Grouping employees by common task permits economies of scale and efficient resource use.
Large, functionally based departments enhance the development of in-depth skills because people work
on a variety of related problems and are associated with other experts within their
own department. 

The functional structure also provides a way to centralize decision making and provide unified
direction from top managers.

There are barriers across departments that lead to poor communication and coordination.
That cause a slow response to changes.

Another problem is that decisions involving more than one department may pile up at the top of the organization and be delayed.


Divisional Approach.
This approach helps organization to be flexible and responsive to change because each unit is small. 
By having employees working on a single product line, the concern for customers' needs is high.
Great coordination exists within divisions; however, coordination across divisions is often poor.
At Hewlett-Packard divisions went in opposite directions.
The software produced in one division did not fit the hardware produced in another.
Another major disadvantage is duplication of resources and the high cost of running separate divisions.
The organization loses efficiency and economies of scale. 
In addition, the small size of departments within each division may
result in a lack of technical specialization, expertise, and training.


Matrix Approach.
The matrix can be highly effective in rapidly changing environment.
The conflict and frequent meetings generated by the matrix allow new issues to be raised and resolved.
The matrix structure makes efficient use of human resources because specialists can be transferred from one division to another. 

The major problem is the confusion and frustration caused by the dual chain of command.
The matrix structure also can generate high conflict between functional and project goals.
Rivalry between the two sides of the matrix can be exceedingly difficult for two-boss employees to manage. 
This problem leads to the third disadvantage: time lost to meetings to resolve this conflict.
More discussions, less actions.



Team Approach.
The team concept breaks down barriers across departments and improves coordination and cooperation.
The team concept also enables the organization to more quickly adapt to customer requests and
environmental changes and speeds decision making because decisions need not go
to the top of the hierarchy for approval. Another big advantage is the morale boost.
A large amount of time is devoted to meetings, thus increasing coordination time. 
Unless the organization truly needs teams to coordinate complex projects
and adapt to the environment, it will lose production efficiency with them.

The team approach may cause too much decentralization.


Virtual Network Approach.
The biggest advantages to a virtual network approach are flexibility and competitiveness on a global scale.
This approach allows to shift resources and respond quickly.
Flexibility comes from the ability to hire whatever services are needed, and to change a few months later without
constraints from owning plant, equipment, and facilities. 
The organization can continually redefine itself to fit new product and market opportunities.
Large teams of staff specialists and administrators are not needed. 
A network organization may have only two or three levels of hierarchy, compared with ten or more in
traditional organizations.
One of the major disadvantages is lack of hands-on control. Managers do not have
all operations under one roof and must rely on contracts, coordination, negotiation,
and electronic linkages to hold things together. 
Each partner in the network necessarily acts in its own self-interest.
Finally, in this type of organization, employee loyalty can weaken.
A cohesive corporate culture is less likely to develop, and turnover tends to be higher because emotional commitment
between organization and employee is weak.


291

Coordination refers to the quality of collaboration across departments. 
Without coordination, a company's left hand will not act in concert with the right hand, causing problems and conflicts. 
Coordination is required regardless of whether the organization has a functional, divisional, or team structure.


A task force is a temporary team or committee designed to solve a short-term problem involving several departments.
Task force members represent their departments and share information that enables coordination.

A cross-functional team furthers horizontal coordination because participants from several departments meet regularly to solve ongoing problems of common interest. 
This team is similar to a task force except that it works with continuing rather than temporary problems and might exist for several years.
Team members think in terms of working together for the good of the whole rather than just for their own department.

Companies also use project managers to increase coordination between functional departments. 
A project manager is a person who is responsible for coordinating the activities of several departments for the completion of a specific project.

The distinctive feature of the project manager position is that the person is not a member of one of the departments being coordinated. 
Project managers are located outside of the departments and have responsibility for coordinating several departments to achieve desired project outcomes.
The project manager has authority over the project but not over the people assigned to it.
The PM is responsible for coordination and communication with assigned team members, but department managers retain line authority over functional employees.
Project managers might also have titles such as product manager, integrator, program manager, or process owner. 
Project managers need excellent people skills. 
They use expertise and persuasion to achieve coordination among various departments, and their
jobs involve getting people together, listening, building trust, confronting problems, and
resolving confl icts and disputes in the best interest of the project and the organization.

Product managers set budget goals, marketing targets, and strategies and obtain the cooperation from advertising, production, and sales personnel needed for implementing product strategy.

Reengineering
Reengineering, sometimes called business process reengineering, is the radical redesign of business processes 
to achieve dramatic improvements in cost, quality, service, and speed.
Because the focus of reengineering is on process rather than function, reengineering generally leads to a shift away from a strong vertical structure to one
emphasizing stronger horizontal coordination and greater flexibility in responding to changes in the environment.

A process is an organized group of related tasks that work together
to transform inputs into outputs and create value. Common examples of processes
include new product development, order fulfillment, and customer service.
Reengineering frequently involves a shift to a horizontal team-based structure,
as described earlier in this chapter. All the people who work on a particular process
have easy access to one another so they can easily communicate and coordinate their
efforts, share knowledge, and provide value to customers.
Because reengineering is expensive, time consuming, and usually painful
to implement, it seems best suited to companies that are facing serious competitive threats.



Quiz. (300)
10. Carnival Cruise Lines (CCL) provides pleasure cruises to the masses. Carnival has several ships and works on high volume/low price rather than offering luxury cruises. 
What would you predict about the organization structure of a CCL ship compared with a company that had smaller ships for wealthy customers?

Wealthy customers may require some specific service. Fresh fruits, drugs, unusual routes.
Every luxury cruise may be considered as a project. While low cost cruises make their money on the big scale.

Quote by Boris Kagarlitsky
Чем более «гибкой» является бизнес-структура, тем более она склонна концентрироваться на краткосрочных задачах, жертвуя долгосрочными.


----------------
ORGANIZING
Ch10. Managing Change and Innovation
----------------

Research confirms that successful new ideas are generally those that are backed by someone who believes in
the idea wholeheartedly and is determined to convince others of its value.

The inventor comes up with a new idea and understands its technical value but has neither the ability 
nor the interest to promote it for acceptance within the organization. 
The champion believes in the idea, confronts the organizational realities of costs and benefits, and gains the political
and financial support needed to bring it to reality. 
The sponsor is a high-level manager who approves the idea, protects the idea, and removes major organizational
barriers to acceptance. 
The critic counterbalances the zeal of the champion by
challenging the concept and providing a reality test against hard-nosed criteria.
The critic prevents people in the other roles from adopting a bad idea.

A new-venture team is a unit separate from the rest of the organization that is responsible for
developing and initiating a major innovation.
Whenever BMW Group begins developing a new car, 
the project's team members—from engineering, design, production,
marketing, purchasing, and finance are relocated to a separate Research and Innovation Center, 
where they work collaboratively to speed the new product to market.

Two key aspects of change in organizations
are changing products and technologies and changing people and culture.
 
 
 
There are several methods to improve internal relationship in company:
1. Team-building activities.
Series of exercises can be used with members of cross-departmental
teams to help them learn to act and function as a team.
 
2. Survey-feedback activities.
Survey feedback begins with a questionnaire distributed
to employees on values, climate, participation, leadership, and group cohesion
within their organization.
 
Resistance to Change
 
1. People typically resist a change they believe conflicts with their self-interests.
A proposed change in job design, structure, or technology may lead to an increase
in employees' workload. The fear of personal loss is perhaps the biggest 
obstacle to organizational change.
 
2. Lack of Understanding and Trust. Employees
often distrust the intentions behind a change or do not understand the intended purpose of a change. 
If previous working relationships with an idea champion have been negative, resistance may occur.
 
3. Uncertainty. Uncertainty is the lack of information about future events. 
It represents a fear of the unknown. 
Uncertainty is especially threatening for employees who have a
low tolerance for change and fear anything out of the ordinary.
 
But there are some means to overcome this resistance.
1. Communication and Education.
Education is especially important when the change involves new
technical knowledge or users are unfamiliar with the idea.
Communication and education are used when solid information about the change is needed 
by users and others who may resist implementation.
People are much more likely to change their behavior when they
both understand the rational reasons for doing so and see a picture of change that
influences their feelings.
 
2. Participation.
Participation involves users and potential resisters in designing the change. 
This approach is time consuming, but it pays off because users understand
and become committed to the change.
 
Ex. You come up to the team with a problem and ask for help.
When discussing you push your team-members to the solution you already have.
Then you fix the solution and if you meet some resistance you press
insurgents with fact that it is our common decision, so we need to lean to it.
Also the person who proposed this solution may become it's champion.
 
3. Negotiation.
Negotiation is a more formal means of achieving cooperation. 
Negotiation uses formal bargaining to win acceptance and approval of a desired change.
 
4. Coercion.
Coercion means that managers use formal power to force employees to change. 
Resisters are told to accept the change or lose rewards or even their jobs.
 
5. Top Management Support.
Top management support symbolizes to all employees that the change is important for the organization. 
One survey found that 80 percent of companies that are successful innovators 
have top executives who frequently reinforce the importance of innovation both verbally and symbolically
 
Implementation of change first requires that people see a need for change.
Managers should be prepared to encounter resistance. Some typical reasons for
resistance include self-interest, lack of trust, uncertainty, and conflicting goals.

----------------
ORGANIZING
Ch11. Managing Human Resources
----------------

In many companies, especially those that rely more on employee information,
creativity, knowledge, and service rather than on production machinery,
success depends on the ability to manage human capital.

Human capital refers to the economic value of the combined knowledge,
experience, skills, and capabilities of employees.


342



----------------
ORGANIZING
Ch12. Managing Diversity
----------------


