PMBOK5
p28

Ch1. Intro
PMBOK is recognized as a good practices.
"Good practice" means there is general agreement that the
application of the knowledge, skills, tools, and techniques can enhance the chances of success over many projects.

"Good practice" does not mean that the knowledge described should always be applied uniformly to all projects; the
organization and/or project management team is responsible for determining what is appropriate for any given project.


What is a Project?
A project is a temporary endeavor undertaken to create a unique product, service, or result. The temporary
nature of projects indicates that a project has a definite beginning and end. The end is reached when the project’s
objectives have been achieved or when the project is terminated because its objectives will not or cannot be met,
or when the need for the project no longer exists. A project may also be terminated if the client (customer, sponsor,
or champion) wishes to terminate the project.

What is Project Management?
Project management is the application of knowledge, skills, tools, and techniques to project activities to meet the
project requirements. Project management is accomplished through the appropriate application and integration of
the 47 logically grouped project management processes, which are categorized into five Process Groups. These five
Process Groups are:
• Initiating,
• Planning,
• Executing,
• Monitoring and Controlling, and
• Closing.


p38
A project management office (PMO) is a management structure that standardizes the project-related governance
processes and facilitates the sharing of resources, methodologies, tools, and techniques. The responsibilities of a
PMO can range from providing project management support functions to actually being responsible for the direct
management of one or more projects.
The PMO integrates data and information from corporate strategic projects and evaluates how higher level
strategic objectives are being fulfilled. The PMO is the natural liaison between the organization’s portfolios,
programs, projects, and the corporate measurement systems (e.g. balanced scorecard).

In Management theory (Daft) Project Management's purpose is to overview and coordinate the work of
several departments.

A primary function of a PMO is to support project managers in a variety of ways which may include, but are not
limited to:
• Managing shared resources across all projects administered by the PMO;
• Identifying and developing project management methodology, best practices, and standards;
• Coaching, mentoring, training, and oversight;
• Monitoring compliance with project management standards, policies, procedures, and templates by means
of project audits;
• Developing and managing project policies, procedures, templates, and other shared documentation
(organizational process assets); and
• Coordinating communication across projects.

Relationship Between Project Management, Operations Management, and Organizational Strategy

Operations evolve to support the day-to-day business, and are necessary to achieve strategic and tactical goals of the business.
Operations require business process management.
Changes in business operations may be the focus of a dedicated project — especially if there are substantial
changes to business operations as a result of a new product or service delivery. 

Operations are ongoing endeavors that produce repetitive outputs, with resources assigned to do basically the
same set of tasks according to the standards institutionalized in a product life cycle. Unlike the ongoing nature of
operations, projects are temporary endeavors.

Operations management is an area of management concerned with ongoing production of goods and/or
services. It involves ensuring that business operations continue efficiently by using the optimum resources needed
and meeting customer demands. It is concerned with managing processes that transform inputs (e.g., materials,
components, energy, and labor) into outputs (e.g., products, goods, and/or services).


Operational stakeholders should be engaged and their needs identified as part of the stakeholder register, and
their influence (positive or negative) should be addressed as part of the risk management plan.

The following list includes examples of operational stakeholders (depending upon the business):
Plant operators, Manufacturing line supervisors, Help desk staff, Production system support analysts, 
Customer service representative, Salespersons, Maintenance workers, Telephone sales personnel, 
Call center personnel, Retail workers, Line managers, and Training officers.

Role of the Project Manager

The project manager is the person assigned by the performing organization to lead the team that is responsible
for achieving the project objectives. The role of a project manager is distinct from a functional manager or operations
manager. Typically the functional manager is focused on providing management oversight for a functional or a
business unit, and operations managers are responsible for ensuring that business operations are efficient.

The project manager becomes the link between the strategy and the team.
Projects are essential to the growth and survival of organizations. Projects create value in the form of 
improved business processes, are indispensable in the development of new products and services.

p46.
Ch2. Project Life Cycle

Organizational Structures

Functional organization
The classic functional organization is a hierarchy where each employee has one clear superior.
Staff members are grouped by specialty, such as production, marketing, engineering, and accounting at the top level.
Specialties may be further subdivided into focused functional units, such as mechanical and electrical engineering.
Each department in a functional organization will do its project work independently of other departments.
Project is coordinated on Function Managers level.

Project Manager's Authority is little or none.
Resource Availability is little or none.
Functional Manager manages the project budget.
Project Manager's Role is part-time.

Matrix organizations can be classified as weak, balanced, or strong depending on the relative level
of power and influence between functional and project managers.

Weak matrix organizations maintain many of the characteristics of a functional organization, 
and the role of the project manager is more of a coordinator or expediter. 
A project expediter works as staff assistant and communications coordinator. The expediter cannot personally
make or enforce decisions. Project coordinators have power to make some decisions, have some authority, and
report to a higher-level manager.

Weak matrix
Project Manager's Authority is low.
Resource Availability is low.
Functional Manager manages the project budget.
Project Manager's Role is part-time.



Strong matrix organizations have many of the characteristics of the projectized organization,
and have full-time project managers with considerable authority and full-time project administrative
staff. While the balanced matrix organization recognizes the need for a project manager, it does not provide the
project manager with the full authority over the project and project funding.

Balanced matrix
Project Manager's Authority is low to moderate.
Resource Availability is low to moderate.
Functional Manager and Project Manager manage the project budget together. 
Project Manager's Role is full-time.


Strong matrix
Project Manager's Authority is moderate to high.
Resource Availability is moderate to high.
Project Manager manages the project budget. 
Project Manager's Role is full-time.

Strong Matrix has a PMO.


In Projectized Organization project manager has a team and is fully authorized.

Projectized Organization
Project Manager's Authority is high to almost total.
Resource Availability is high to almost total.
Project Manager manages the project budget. 
Project Manager's Role is full-time.

Project Stakeholders and Governance
A stakeholder is an individual, group, or organization who may affect, be affected by, or perceive itself to be
affected by a decision, activity, or outcome of a project. Stakeholders may be actively involved in the project or have
interests that may be positively or negatively affected by the performance or completion of the project. 


Project governance - команда управления проектом.

Stakeholders include all members of the project team as well as all interested entities that are internal or
external to the organization. 
The project manager should manage the influences of these various stakeholders in relation to the project
requirements to ensure a successful outcome.
Stakeholder identification is a continuous process throughout the entire project life cycle.

Some examples of stakeholders:
- Sponsor. A sponsor is the person or group who provides resources and support for the project and is
accountable for enabling success. 
For issues that are beyond the control of the project manager, the sponsor serves
as an escalation path. The sponsor may also be involved in other important issues such as authorizing
changes in scope, phase-end reviews, and go/no-go decisions when risks are particularly high.
- Customers and users. Users are the persons or organizations who will use the project’s
product, service, or result.
- Sellers. Sellers are external companies that provide components or some services that are 
necessary for the project.
- Organizational groups. Organizational groups are internal stakeholders who are affected by the activities
of the project team. These groups may include  marketing and sales, human resources, legal, finance, 
operations, manufacturing, and customer service. 

Project governance framework provides the project manager and team with
structure, processes, decision-making models and tools for managing the project.

Examples of the elements of a project governance framework include:
• Project success and deliverable acceptance criteria;
• Process to identify, escalate, and resolve issues that arise during the project;
• Relationship among the project team, organizational groups, and external stakeholders;
• Project organization chart that identifies project roles;
• Processes and procedures for the communication of information;
• Project decision-making processes;
• Guidelines for aligning project governance and organizational strategy;
• Project life cycle approach;
• Process for stage gate or phase reviews;
• Process for review and approval for changes to budget, scope, quality, and schedule which are beyond
the authority of the project manager; and
• Process to align internal stakeholders with project process requirements.

Project Success
Since projects are temporary in nature, the success of the project should be measured in terms of completing
the project within the constraints of scope, time, cost, quality, resources, and risk as approved between the project
managers and senior management. After project completion there may be a probation period to understand was a project successfull or not.
It may be up 6 months. Sydney opera house was not successfull in terms of time and cost. But now it is a visit card of Sydney.
And may be thought as a successfull project.

The project manager is responsible and accountable for setting realistic and achievable boundaries for the project.

Project Team.
The project team includes the project manager and the group of individuals who act together in performing the
work of the project to achieve its objectives. 

p63.

p74
Ch3. Project Management Processes


Project Management Process Groups.
1. Initiating
2. Planning
3. Monitoring and Controlling
4. Executing
5. Closing

The Process Groups are not project life cycle phases.

Initiating Process Group
The Initiating Process Group consists of those processes performed to define a new project or a new phase
of an existing project by obtaining authorization to start the project or phase.
Initial scope and initial financial resources are comited.

Internal and external stakeholders are identified.
PM is selected.

All this info is reflected in project charter and stakeholder register.

When the project charter is approved, the project becomes officially authorized.
The project boundary is the interval between the time project is authorized and project's completion.

Initiating Process Group helps the stakeholders to see if their expectations meet project's purposes.
It gives a visibility about the project scope. 
These processes help set the vision of the project—what is needed to be accomplished.
The success criteria are verified. The project stakeholders are reviewed.
And the decision to continue, delay or stop project is made.

Involving the sponsors, customers, and other stakeholders during initiation creates a shared understanding of
success criteria, and generally improves deliverable acceptance, customer satisfaction, and other stakeholder satisfaction.


Planning Process Group
The Planning Process Group consists of those processes performed to establish the total scope of the effort,
define and refine the objectives, and develop the course of action required to attain those objectives.
Project management plan and other project documents are developed in this process group.
As more project information or characteristics are gathered and understood, additional planning will
likely be required. Significant changes occurring throughout the project life cycle trigger a need to revisit one
or more of the planning processes and possibly some of the initiating processes. This progressive detailing of
the project management plan is called progressive elaboration, indicating that planning and documentation are
iterative and ongoing activities.
The main purpose of this process group is to delineate the strategy and tactics. 
Deliberate planning makes path to complete the project transparent, so it is easier to get stakeholder engagement.
These processes express how this will be done, setting the route to the desired objective.

The project management plan and project documents developed as outputs from the Planning Process Group
will explore all aspects of the scope, time, cost, quality, communications, human resources, risks, procurements,
and stakeholder engagement.

p.90
Ch4. Project Integration Management

Project Integration Management includes the processes to identify, define, combine, unify, and
coordinate the various processes and project management activities 
within the Project Management Process Groups.


Project Integration Management includes making choices about resource allocation, 
making trade-offs among competing objectives and alternatives, 
and managing the interdependencies among the project management Knowledge Areas.

There are six processes within this knowledge area:
1. Develop Project Charter
Project Charter is a document that authorizes the existence of the project and
provides PM to apply organizational resources to project activities.

The key benefit of this process is a well-defined project start and project boundaries, 
creation of a formal record of the project, 
and a direct way for senior management to formally accept and commit to the project.

A project manager is identified and assigned as early as possible.
Preferably development of project charter should prior of planning.
The project charter should be authored by the sponsoring entity.

The project charter provides the project manager 
with the authority to plan and execute the project.
It's better when PM participates in creating project charter.
Thus he gets clearer understanding of project objectives.

Inputs:
4.1.1.1 Project Statement of Work
The project statement of work (SOW) is a narrative description of products, services, 
or results to be delivered by a project.
SOW:
Business need. Why the company needs this product? Will it meet some market needs?
Or it will allow to take some technological advance?

Product scope description. What the product should do? What results we want to see?

Strategic plan. How this product will fit company strategy?

4.1.1.2 Business Case
Is the document that contains cost-benefit analysis 
to justify and establish boundaries for the project.
Basing on BC top management will make decision 
should the company make this product or not.

4.1.1.3 Agreements
Agreements are used to define initial intentions for a project.
Agreements may take the form of contracts (for external customer), service level agreements (SLA),
verbal agreements, email, or other written agreements.

4.1.1.4 Enterprise Environmental Factors
Some examples:
• Governmental standards, industry standards, or regulations
• Organizational culture and structure

4.1.1.5 Organizational Process Assets
The organizational process assets include, but are not limited to:
• Organizational standard processes, policies, and process definitions
• Templates (e.g. for project charter)
• Historical information and lessons learned knowledge base 
(how similar tasks were done before, how long did the take and so on)

Tools and Techniques
4.1.2.1 Expert Judgment
Expert judgment is applied to all technical and management details during this process.
Such expertise may be provided by:
• Consultants
• Subject matter experts
• PMO
...

4.1.2.2 Facilitation Techniques
Brainstorming, conflict resolution, problem solving, and meeting management 
are examples of key techniques used by facilitators 
to help teams and individuals accomplish project activities.



Outputs

4.1.3.1 Project Charter
The project charter is the document issued by the project initiator or sponsor 
that formally authorizes the existence of a project and provides 
the project manager with the authority to apply organizational resources to
project activities.

What project charter may contain:
• Project purpose or justification 
• Measurable project objectives (success criteria)
• High-level requirements
• High-level project description and boundaries
• High-level risks
• Summary milestone schedule
• Summary budget
• Stakeholder list
• PM, his responsibility and authority level


2. Develop Project Management Plan
Project Management Plan is an integrated plan of all subsidiary plans.
The project management plan defines 
how the project is executed, monitored and controlled, and closed.

Inputs:
4.2.1.1 Project Charter
At a minimum, the project charter should define the high-level boundaries of the project. 
The project manager uses the project charter as the starting point
for initial planning throughout the Initiating Process Group.

4.2.1.2 Outputs from Other Processes in scope management


4.2.1.3 Enterprise Environmental Factors
see 4.1.1.4

4.2.1.4 Organizational Process Assets
see 4.1.1.5



Tools and Techniques
4.2.2.1 Expert Judgment
• Prioritize the work on the project to ensure the project resources are 
allocated to the appropriate work at the appropriate time.
• Develop technical and management details to be included in the project management plan
• Determine resources and skill levels needed to perform project work,
• Determine which project documents will be subject to the formal change control process

4.2.2.2 Facilitation Techniques
see 4.1.2.2


Outputs
4.2.3.1 Project Management Plan
Project baselines include, but are not limited to:
• Scope baseline
• Schedule baseline
• Cost baseline
Subsidiary plans include, but are not limited to:
• Scope management plan
• Cost management plan
• Requirements management plan
• Quality management plan



3. Direct and Manage Project Work
The process of performing work defined in PM Plan and implementing approved changes.



Outputs
4.3.3.1 Deliverables
A deliverable is any unique and verifiable product, result or capability to perform 
a service that is required to be produced to complete a process, 
phase, or project. Deliverables are typically tangible components completed to
meet the project objectives and can include elements of the project management plan.

4.3.3.2 Work Performance Data
Work performance data are the raw observations and measurements 
identified during activities being performed to carry out the project work.


4.3.3.3 Change Requests
A change request is a formal proposal to modify any document, deliverable, or baseline.

Requests for a change may include:
• Corrective action — An intentional activity that realigns the performance of the project work with the
project management plan;
• Preventive action — An intentional activity that ensures the future performance of the project work is
aligned with the project management plan;
• Defect repair — An intentional activity to modify a nonconforming product or product component; and/or
• Updates — Changes to formally controlled project documents, plans, etc., to reflect modified or additional
ideas or content.

4.3.3.4 Project Management Plan Updates
Different plans may be updated.

4.3.3.5 Project Documents Updates
Project documents that may be updated:
• Requirements documentation,
• Project logs (issues, assumptions, etc.),
• Risk register, and
• Stakeholder register.










4. Monitor and Control Project Work
It is the process of tracking, reviewing, and reporting project
progress against the performance objectives defined in the project management plan.

5. Perform Integrated Change Control
It is the process of reviewing all change requests; approving
changes and managing changes to deliverables.	

6. Close Project or Phase - The process of finalizing all 
activities across all of the Project Management Process Groups 
to formally complete the phase or project.


p.132
Ch5. Scope Management

In the project context, the term scope can refer to:
• Product scope. The features and functions that characterize a product, service, or result;
• Project scope. The work performed to deliver a product, service, or result with the specified features and
functions. The term project scope is sometimes viewed as including product scope.


5.1 Plan Scope Management
Plan Scope Management is the process of creating a scope management plan that documents how the project
scope will be defined, validated, and controlled. 
The key benefit of this process is that it provides guidance and
direction on how scope will be managed throughout the project.

Outputs
5.1.3.1 Scope Management Plan
The scope management plan is a component of the project management plan that describes how the
scope will be defined, developed, monitored, controlled, and verified.

The components of a scope management plan include:
• Process for preparing a detailed project scope statement;
• Process that enables the creation of the WBS from the detailed project scope statement;
• Process that establishes how the WBS will be maintained and approved;
• Process that specifies how formal acceptance of the completed project deliverables will be obtained; and
• Process to control how requests for changes to the detailed project scope statement will be processed.

5.1.3.2 Requirements Management Plan
The requirements management plan is a component of the project management plan that describes how
requirements will be analyzed, documented, and managed.

Components of the requirements management plan can include:
• How requirements activities will be planned, tracked, and reported;
• Configuration management activities such as: how changes to the product will be initiated, how impacts
will be analyzed, how they will be traced, tracked, and reported, as well as the authorization levels
required to approve these changes;
• Requirements prioritization process;
• Product metrics that will be used and the rationale for using them; and
• Traceability structure to reflect which requirement attributes will be captured on the traceability matrix.

5.2 Collect Requirements
Collect Requirements is the process of determining, documenting, and managing stakeholder needs and
requirements to meet project objectives. The key benefit of this process is that it provides the basis for defining and
managing the project scope including product scope.

Requirements become the foundation of the WBS.

Outputs
5.2.3.1 Requirements Documentation
Requirements documentation describes how individual requirements meet the business need for the project.
Requirements may start out at a high level and become progressively more detailed as more about the requirements
is known. Before being baselined, requirements need to be unambiguous (measurable and testable), traceable,
complete, consistent, and acceptable to key stakeholders.

5.2.3.2 Requirements Traceability Matrix
The requirements traceability matrix is a grid that links product requirements from their origin to the
deliverables that satisfy them. The implementation of a requirements traceability matrix helps ensure that each
requirement adds business value by linking it to the business and project objectives.

5.3 Define Scope
Define Scope is the process of developing a detailed description of the project and product. The key benefit of
this process is that it describes the project, service, or result boundaries by defining which of the requirements
collected will be included in and excluded from the project scope.

Outputs
5.3.3.1 Project Scope Statement
The project scope statement is the description of the project scope, major deliverables, assumptions, and
constraints.
The detailed project scope statement includes the following:
• Product scope description. Progressively elaborates the characteristics of the product, service, or result
described in the project charter and requirements documentation. (TZ)
• Acceptance criteria. A set of conditions that is required to be met before deliverables are accepted.
• Any unique and verifiable product, result, or capability to perform a service that is required
to be produced to complete a process, phase, or project. 
Deliverables also include ancillary results.
• Project exclusion.
Explicitly stating what is out of
scope for the project helps to manage stakeholders' expectations.
• Constraints. A limiting factor that affects the execution of a project or process.
Like budget constraints, schedule milestones
• Assumptions. A factor in the planning process that is considered to be true, real, or certain, without
proof or demonstration.

5.3.3.2 Project Documents Updates
Project documents that may be updated:
• Stakeholder register,
• Requirements documentation, and
• Requirements traceability matrix.


5.4 Create WBS
Create WBS is the process of subdividing project deliverables and project work into smaller, more manageable
components.

The WBS is a hierarchical decomposition of the total scope of work to be carried out by the project team to
accomplish the project objectives and create the required deliverables. The WBS organizes and defines the total
scope of the project, and represents the work specified in the current approved project scope statement.

The planned work is contained within the lowest level of WBS components, which are called work packages.
Small tasks are more manageable. They can be estimated. It's easier to plan budget.
Small task may be assigned to only one person who will be responsible for it.

Outputs
5.4.3.1 Scope Baseline
The scope baseline is the approved version of a scope statement, work breakdown structure (WBS), and its
associated WBS dictionary, that can be changed only through formal change control procedures and is used as a
basis for comparison.
Components of the scope baseline include:
• Project scope statement. The project scope statement includes the description of the project scope,
major deliverables, assumptions, and constraints.
• WBS. The WBS is a hierarchical decomposition of the total scope of work to be carried out by the project
team to accomplish the project objectives and create the required deliverables.

The WBS is finalized by
assigning each work package to a control account and establishing a unique identifier for that work
package from a code of accounts. These identifiers provide a structure for hierarchical summation
of costs, schedule, and resource information.

• WBS dictionary. The WBS dictionary is a document that provides detailed deliverable, activity, and
scheduling information about each component in the WBS.


5.4.3.2 Project Documents Updates
Project documents that may be updated include, but are not limited to, requirements documentation, which may
need to be updated to include approved changes. If approved change requests result from the Create WBS process,
then the requirements documentation may need to be updated to include approved changes.

p.160
5.5 Validate Scope
Validate Scope is the process of formalizing acceptance of the completed project deliverables. The key benefit
of this process is that it brings objectivity to the acceptance process and increases the chance of final product,
service, or result acceptance by validating each deliverable.

The verified deliverables obtained from the Control Quality process are reviewed with the customer or sponsor
to ensure that they are completed satisfactorily and have received formal acceptance of the deliverables by the
customer or sponsor.

The Validate Scope process differs from the Control Quality process in that the former is primarily concerned
with acceptance of the deliverables, while quality control is primarily concerned with correctness of the deliverables
and meeting the quality requirements specified for the deliverables. Control Quality is generally performed before
Validate Scope, although the two processes may be performed in parallel.

Outputs
5.5.3.1 Accepted Deliverables
Deliverables that meet the acceptance criteria are formally signed off and approved by the customer or sponsor.
Formal documentation received from the customer or sponsor acknowledging formal stakeholder acceptance of
the project’s deliverables is forwarded to the Close Project or Phase process.

5.5.3.2 Change Requests
The completed deliverables that have not been formally accepted are documented, along with the reasons
for nonacceptance of those deliverables. Those deliverables may require a change request for defect repair. The
change requests are processed for review and disposition through the Perform Integrated Change Control process.

5.5.3.3 Work Performance Information
Work performance information includes information about project progress, such as which deliverables
have started, their progress, which deliverables have finished, or which have been accepted. This information is
documented as described in Section 10.3.3.1 and communicated to stakeholders.

5.5.3.4 Project Documents Updates
Project documents that may be updated as a result of the Validate Scope process include any documents that
define the product or report status on product completion. Verified project documents may require approvals from
the customer or sponsor in the form of signatures or signoffs.

5.6 Control Scope
Control Scope is the process of monitoring the status of the project and product scope and managing changes to
the scope baseline. The key benefit of this process is that it allows the scope baseline to be maintained throughout
the project.

Controlling the project scope ensures all requested changes and recommended corrective or preventive actions
are processed through the Perform Integrated Change Control process (see Section 4.5). Control Scope is also used
to manage the actual changes when they occur and is integrated with the other control processes. The uncontrolled
expansion to product or project scope without adjustments to time, cost, and resources is referred to as scope
creep.

Outputs
5.6.3.1 Work Performance Information
Work performance information produced includes correlated and contextualized information on how the project
scope is performing compared to the scope baseline. It can include the categories of the changes received, the
identified scope variances and their causes, how they impact schedule or cost, and the forecast of the future scope
performance. This information provides a foundation for making scope decisions.

5.6.3.2 Change Requests
Analysis of scope performance can result in a change request to the scope baseline or other components
of the project management plan. Change requests can include preventive or corrective actions, defect repairs,
or enhancement requests. Change requests are processed for review and disposition according to the Perform
Integrated Change Control process (Section 4.5).

5.6.3.3 Project Management Plan Updates
Project management plan updates may include:
• Scope Baseline Updates. If the approved change requests have an effect on the project scope, then
the scope statement, the WBS, and the WBS dictionary are revised and reissued to reflect the approved
changes through Perform Integrated Change Control process.
• Other Baseline Updates. If the approved change requests have an effect on the project besides the
project scope, then the corresponding cost baseline and schedule baselines are revised and reissued to
reflect the approved changes.

5.6.3.4 Project Documents Updates
Project documents that may be updated include:
• Requirements documentation, and
• Requirements traceability matrix.

5.6.3.5 Organizational Process Assets Updates
Organizational process assets that may be updated include:
• Causes of variances,
• Corrective action chosen and the reasons, and
• Other types of lessons learned from project scope control.









p.282
Ch9. Project Human Resource Management




p.418
Ch13. Project Stakeholder Management
Project Stakeholder Management includes the processes required to identify the people, 
groups, or organizations that could impact or be impacted by the project, 
to analyze stakeholder expectations and their impact on the project, 
and to develop appropriate management strategies for effectively engaging stakeholders
in project decisions and execution. 
Stakeholder management also focuses on continuous communication with
stakeholders to understand their needs and expectations, 
addressing issues as they occur, managing conflicting
interests and fostering appropriate stakeholder engagement in project decisions and activities. 
Stakeholder satisfaction should be managed as a key project objective.

There are four Project Stakeholder Management processes:
13.1 Identify Stakeholders

Inputs:
1 Project Charter
2 Procurement Documents
3 Enterprise Environmental Factors
4 Organizational Process Assets

Tools & Techniques
1 Stakeholder analysis
2 Expert judgment
3 Meetings

Outputs:
1 Stakeholder Register









13.2 Plan Stakeholder Management
The process of developing appropriate management strategies to
effectively engage stakeholders throughout the project life cycle, 
based on the analysis of their needs,
interests, and potential impact on project success.

Inputs
1 Project management plan
2 Stakeholder register
3 Enterprise environmental factors
4 Organizational process assets

Tools & Techniques
1 Expert judgment
2 Meetings
3 Analytical techniques

Outputs
1 Stakeholder management plan
2 Project documents updates

13.3 Manage Stakeholder Engagement
The process of communicating and working with stakeholders
to meet their needs/expectations, address issues as they occur.


Inputs
.1 Stakeholder management plan
.2 Communications management
plan
.3 Change log
.4 Organizational process assets


Tools & Techniques
.1 Communication methods
.2 Interpersonal skills
.3 Management skills


Outputs
.1 Issue log
.2 Change requests
.3 Project management plan
updates
.4 Project documents updates
.5 Organizational process assets
updates





13.4 Control Stakeholder Engagement
The process of monitoring overall project stakeholder
relationships and adjusting strategies and plans for engaging stakeholders.


Inputs
.1 Project management plan
.2 Issue log
.3 Work performance data
.4 Project documents

Tools & Techniques
.1 Information management
systems
.2 Expert judgment
.3 Meetings


Outputs
.1 Work performance
information
.2 Change requests
.3 Project management plan
updates
.4 Project documents updates
.5 Organizational process assets
updates























FF MBA in PM

Stakeholders

Customers, decision makers, vendors, and employees obviously
belong in this group, but, in a larger sense, anyone who participates in
the project or is impacted by its result is a stakeholder.


Identifying stakeholders is a primary task because all the important
decisions during the definition and planning stages of the project are
made by these stakeholders. These are the people who, under the
guidance of the project manager, establish agreements on the goals
and constraints of the project, construct the strategies and schedules,
and approve the budget.

There are five primary stakeholders — project manager,
project team, functional management, sponsor, and customer.


It’s not enough to deliver on the customer’s demands; 
successful projects have to meet all stakeholder expectations.

When searching for stakeholders, rather than asking,
"Who is the customer?" or "Who is the project team?" ask, "Who
will make a contribution?"


Stakeholder roles: PM
PM is planning the project, identifying the
stakeholders, watching for cost overruns, or refereeing disputes, the
project manager has the primary role in any project.

The project manager must ask questions like: "What is my authority?"
"Who do I report to?" “Does this mean I'll be relieved of other responsibilities?"
"What are my expectations?" If you are a project manager,
you are an important stakeholder, too. Don't forget to satisfy yourself!


Stakeholder roles: Project Team
Who will do the work? The answer is the project team, in
tandem with the project manager. All groups and individuals who contribute
time, skills, and effort to the project are considered team members.
In addition to the people from the company assigned to the
project, these can include contractors, vendors, and even customers.


Customers also may perform some project tasks.
For example, on information systems projects, customers are often active
participants in the system definition and design phases.

Determining who will be part of the team happens at the start of the
project, during definition and planning. This process is complete when
the team members have agreed to their responsibilities and roles on
the project.

Let's look at the steps in this process, from start to finish:
• Tasks are broken down until the different skill requirements
emerge.
• The project manager and sponsor then begin recruiting people and
organizations with the necessary skills.
• The project manager negotiates the involvement of these new team
members.
• The manager clarifies the plan and ensures that all members
understand it.
• Team member responsibilities are documented

Team members with minor roles should be informed about any progress
related to their work before they actually get involved, but
they won't need to participate in every weekly status meeting.
If these members will make the essential contribution to the project 
you will not only want to keep them aware of progress related to their tasks, 
but you will have to consult with them concerning their availability to your
project.


Stakeholder roles: Management

Management, in this case, refers to functional management, also known as line management.

"Management support" as one of the commonly
stated characteristics of successful projects. When asked to
expand on what kind of management support is most helpful, most
project managers describe help in "getting the right people at the right
time" and "timely decisions based on the facts presented by the project
team." These perceptions highlight the contributions that functional
management makes to the project team. They can also guide the project
manager in identifying which functional managers might be stakeholders
on a specific project.

The project manager must work closely with functional managers
in getting the best people for the job. After management has initiated a
project and described its scope, the project manager designs a work
plan that details what skills are required for the project and which
departments the workers possessing these skills will come from.
Armed with this information, the project manager is now ready to
identify the managers of those departments; these are the managers
who will have control over the workers assigned to the project team
and will decide when they are available.

Identifying the managers who will make decisions can be tricky. 
Start with the obvious ones:
• Managers whose operations will be affected by the outcome of the
project
• Managers representing other stakeholders, such as the customer
• The manager to whom the project manager reports


To identify management stakeholders ask these questions:
Which managers will make decisions? 
Who has veto power? 
Who is indirectly affected by these decisions?



Stakeholder roles: Sponsor

The sponsor's position and authority in the organization
are independent of any project, which enables the sponsor to act
as a connection between a project and the normal decision-making
process.

The sponsor provides the authority that the project manager often lacks.

The sponsor's primary task is to help the project
team be successful. The best sponsors know they aren't sponsoring a
project, they are sponsoring the project manager and the project team.
The sponsor's job is to help these people be successful. That's why
another term for sponsor is champion, as in "I am championing this
project team and I will not let anything stand in their way!"

Sponsor must review and approve the project plan. 
The sponsor must endorse the cost-schedule-quality equilibrium represented in the plan.

Having a known and active sponsor was the number
one reason for a project's success, because problems were given
timely attention by a manager who had authority to effect a solution.


Stakeholder roles: The Customer



